The Mortality of the Video Game Character: An Analysis of Permanent Death as a Method of Creating Meaningful Decisions

Preface
Permadeath, for the sake of this paper, refers the removal of a character from the game whenever they die. With this definition, player-focused permadeath is impossible, as the game cannot remove the player from the game. A game with no player cannot continue. Roguelikes often advertise permadeath as a mechanic. While the vessel of the character might be removed from the game, the player is still there, making the death less about the death of a character, and more about the loss of a player’s progress.
Introduction
Games are not limited to what is happening on the screen. It is important to take a step back from the machinations to view all the possible interactions a player can have with a game. Like other forms of media, forum discussion, fan works, and remixing are all ways a fan of a certain piece of media might interact with their beloved works. Games, however, introduce a new form of interaction, agency. Using Josh Bycer’s definition from his article Player Agency: How Game Design Affects Narrative, player agency is “the player's ability to impact the story through the game design or gameplay” (Bycer, 2015, para. 3). Agency allows for an unprecedented amount of interaction with the consumer.  The role of the storyteller is no longer solely in the hands of the producer, power is now given to the player to use in whatever way they please, or not at all. This allows for new methods of storytelling and establishes new ways to experience ideas and emotions. 
Games have started to piece together their own ways to tell a story, though not all of them are unique. Sometimes the most effective way to make a player care about what is happening is to introduce them to a character, make them empathize with and relate to said character, have the character develop and grow as a person, and then kill them. Having a beloved character’s life ended prematurely and without the appropriate narrative closure is an effective way to rile up an audience, no matter the medium. Making the story interactive drastically changes how painful it feels to watch an ally die, and game developers are fully aware of that. In fact, many have used the interactive nature of games to create scenarios where the lives of the characters are in the players hands, lives that are snuffed out if the player fails to perform adequately.
This mechanic, permanent death, referred to from hereon as permadeath, is interesting from a gameplay perspective (logistics of sacrifice, risk/reward management, etc.), where it best shines is in its combination with game narratives. This paper will discuss how different games use permadeath, particularly Darkest Dungeon, and how this game handles permadeath in the most “permanent” fashion.
 
Permadeath as a Game Mechanic
In most games, if a character dies, there are two traditional routes game developers create. The first is the fail state, where the game moves the player to a previous state and forces them to replay the sequence. 
 
Figure 1: A standard game over screen signifying a player’s loss. Taken from Super Mario Odyssey.
The second is to make the player pay a price for resurrection with a metaphorical smack on the wrist. Examples of this might be having the player lose items from their inventory, having the player lose some sort of stat or experience point, or having the player lose some arbitrary number such as score.  
Figure 2: A standard price of resurrection. Taken from the Path of Exile wiki.
Games typically implement a mix of the two in order to discourage the player from dying while also creating a cushy safety net if the player ends up failing. Permadeath games, however, often replaces the two with the purpose of creating a more intense experience, removing the character from the game and shifting focus to the remaining characters. 
 
Figure 3: A character's last line in Fire Emblem: Three Houses. While tragic, it is often irrelevant to the game’s win state. Some of these lines can be particularly tear-jerking.
Initially, this seems like a more forgiving mechanic than the previous two methods. While the player might lose resources, they are not punished in a traditional sense. Often, games with permadeath offer ways to recuperate lost resources and makes game progression easier by making the bottom line of passing significantly lower (e.g. some characters can die, rather than forcing the player to replay a section if a single character dies). Despite this, permadeath games such as Darkest Dungeon, XCOM, and Fire Emblem are considered rather difficult. Game systems aside, it is often emotionally difficult to watch a character die, which adds a layer of “difficulty” to the game. Despite not directly contributing to a loss state, players will still feel like they are losing if one of their units are killed.
Narrative Impact of Permadeath
Upon the character’s death, the player has not lost, yet they feel as if their victory is bittersweet. Even with little writing, these moments can often overshadow entire sections of gameplay with their gloom. This might stem from how narrative is handled in game, and how these deaths are necessarily tragic.
In Chris Crawford’s Art of Interactive Design, he mentions the following:
“What if that first translation, from Big Idea to story, were not done by the storyteller but by the computer in collaboration with the audience? In other words, we simply transfer the process of instantiation from storyteller to computer. The storyteller still defines and controls the Big Idea, but rather than expressing the Big Idea through a single instance, he expresses the Big Idea itself in more abstract terminology. He communicates the Big Idea to the audience in the form of a computer program. The audience runs the computer program, which interacts with the audience in such a way as to spawn a story expressing the Big Idea while matching the interests of the audience.” (Crawford, 2003, p. 341)
Crawford argues that game narratives are told through both the storyteller as well as the player itself. In all forms of media, the tragedy of the character’s loss is only as strong as the relationship the consumer has formed with the character. As such, games like Fire Emblem put large amounts of effort into making sure their characters are likeable and relatable. However, one key difference between games and other forms of media is that games show only a player’s instance of a story, rather than the one true version of a story like other media. As Crawford states: 
“The difference between an interactive Romeo and Juliet and the original Romeo and Juliet is the same difference as that between Chris Crawford and a portrait of Chris Crawford. Yes, the portrait contains a single truth, powerfully made. (Who knows? Perhaps Ms. Mona Lisa was really just a dull Italian housewife, nowhere near as intriguing as her portrait.) But ultimately, it presents a single truth, where interactivity provides many viewing angles to truth. Some of those viewing angles will not be as dramatic or as powerful as others. We should not dismiss interactivity as inferior because it fails to winnow out the less revealing angles. Interactivity shows all of the viewpoints on a truth, strong and weak. Its catholicity of viewpoint is its strength; its undiscriminating nature is its weakness. Let us not condemn it for its weakness without also recognizing its concomitant strength.” (Crawford, 2003, p. 341)
Contrast two tragic deaths scenes -- one portraying the death of Fred Weasley and the other “scene” (nothing is scripted, storytelling is emergent) portraying the death of the randomly generated (and intentionally lower case) XCOM character cell (1:55:17 – 1:59:18 is the most relevant, the actual death is at 1:40:58, but the eulogy is more comparable). Both hit the same notes as plot points. Both show the devastation of conflict, and both involve the losses of beloved characters (cell had been a staple character and had been in a good chunk of the 121 episodes made at the point of her death). As storytelling tools, both are almost equivalent with one critical exception. With Fred, the character’s loss is determined by the creator. There is no say from the audience, and there is only one arbiter on what happens in the story. In XCOM however, there are two sources that determine how a story unfolds. Not only are there mechanics within the game that allow the player to determine the life and death of characters (such as reloading a save), the game itself is often created with the ability to player perfectly and have no character losses, which encourages players to hold themselves to that standard in order to prevent heartbreak. In this regard, the game reverts to a standard fail state, with the game over screen replaced with a save load prompt. This often creates frustrating gameplay, one that game developers often look to alleviate. Two approaches have emerged from it.
The first approach is simple, make permadeath optional. In games like Fire Emblem, where a character’s death can lead to a massive loss of content for the player (unit builds, support conversation, varied ending, etc.), the developers have replaced the mandatory mechanic with a selectable option. This gives the players the option of removing a potentially frustrating aspect of the game while still allowing hardcore players to feel the same exhilaration of close encounters with death.  
Figure 4: (Right) The options given to the player regarding permadeath in Fire Emblem: Fates. Note that this option is mostly separate from the difficulty choice the player makes (Left). The player can choose to play on Lunatic+ (not shown), the game's hardest difficulty, and still pick Casual, though they cannot pick Phoenix mode.
The second approach is much more interesting. It is a mechanic that has been named after its appearance in the XCOM games. Ironman Mode, often referred to as Ironman, is a mechanic that takes away any allowance that might let a player save a dead character. Typically, this is implemented by removing the save feature, meaning that the player is unable to load any save, even one a single action behind them. Progress is usually kept with an autosave feature, a feature that creates save files for the player instead of giving the player the opportunity to save themselves. Without this mechanic, the player is never truly forced to live with the consequences of their mistakes, as they can load a save where their undesirable actions were never taken. Its implementation has some profound effects on narrative. Combine the Ironman mechanic, an adequate level of difficulty, and a decent amount of RNG-based systems, and perfect play becomes an impossibility. Tension, drama, and tragedy becomes inevitable. Despite its brutal nature, Ironman has garnered a cult following.
From a narrative standpoint, Ironman mechanics are perfect tools for creating meaningful choices. To explain this, it is important to look at what makes a choice meaningful. In Brice Morrison’s article Meaningful Choice in Games: Practical Guide & Case Studies, he identifies four attributes of a meaningful choice:
“Meaningful choice requires the following four components:
Awareness - The player must be somewhat aware they are making a choice (perceive options)
Gameplay Consequences – The choice must have consequences that are both gameplay and aesthetically oriented
Reminders – The player must be reminded of the choice they made after they made it
Permanence - The player cannot go back and undo their choice after exploring the consequences
If all four of these requirements are satisfied, then we have a recipe for meaningful choice. The reason that this is true is that these are the components of a meaningful choice in real life.” (Morrison, 2013, para. 10)
Combined with other simple mechanics, Ironman can satiate all these requirements. Ironically, the permanence aspect can potentially be the subverted other mechanics within a game. Both points will be discussed later using Darkest Dungeon as an example.
When done correctly, Ironman mechanics uses this awareness of mortality in order to create tales of triumph, close calls, and tragic loss. Referring back to Crawford’s idea of games as instances, the power of these tales comes not from careful and poignant storytelling, but from the fact that these tales might never have happened in the first place. These situations are never premediated but rather they are the result of emergent storytelling. Morrison seems to agree with this:
I felt terrible. Awful. He [Boyd] didn’t have to die – the game didn’t have any requirement that he not make it through the battle. It was my fault, needless bloodshed. He was a good, strong character with some good weapons and armor, but now he was gone. (Morrison, 2013, para. 3)
Death in games like Fire Emblem, XCOM, and Darkest Dungeon are very rarely determined. Typically, the deaths of these characters are the result of the player’s unsatisfactory interaction with the game’s systems. Unlike Fred Weasley’s death, whose death was of no fault of the audience, Boyd’s death was avoidable had the Morrison participated better. This adds an element of further tragedy. For the audience, there was no future in which Fred Weasley lives, as they had no say in the matter. Boyd was supposed to live. The game presupposes the victory of the player (since the player must win the battle to advance the story), which implicitly entails that Boyd survives, since a true victory entails that every character makes it out. There is a tinge of anger and discomfort at the injustice of Boyd’s death, which is why many players choose to turn off permadeath in Fire Emblem games but continue to watch Harry Potter after Fred Weasley’s demise.
Spectrum of Permadeath	
Despite the apparent binary of permadeath, there are relevant differences in its implementation between different games. Notably, the enforcement of Ironman mechanics. This, combined with other factors that will be discussed soon, creates a “spectrum of mortality”. The follow creates a ranking of morality based on the games already discussed. 
Figure 5: Ranking of games based on mechanics that allow for a player to circumvent the effects of Ironman
While each game features some sort of permadeath, some of them offers mechanics that allow players to avoid the effects that are attached with permadeath. On top of this, there exists an “disposability” of the character. This word is not the best descriptor possible, so further elaboration is necessary.
In Darkest Dungeon, XCOM: Enemy Unknown, and XCOM 2, characters are generated through an algorithm. This is in contrast with the “handcrafted” characters of Fire Emblem. While this might make Fire Emblem characters have more tragic deaths, as the writers can use their death to represent a heartbreaking failure of their character arc, there is a certain immortality given to the characters. In Morrison’s article, Boyd could have been resurrected by creating a new game. Additionally, players who lose a character can emulate a character’s resurrection by participating in the documentation of the game. For example, if the character Caspar were to die in a personal playthrough of Fire Emblem: Three Houses, one could watch a Let’s Play in which Caspar survives. In this regard, the player still witnesses the completion of the character arc, which removes some of the dramatic tension. Image if two iterations of Harry Potter were recorded, one showing Fred Weasley’s death, the other showing Fred Weasley’s survival. It would diminish the tragedy of Fred’s death in the first iteration. The same principle applies with Fire Emblem. In contrast, the use of algorithms in the character creation process of the first three games allows for millions of characters to be produced. Due to the random generation of the character, each character is unique to one game instance. There is no way to see them succeed through documentation. For example, cell will never be able to fully complete her character arc. Fans of the series created her fictional backstory as a mother who enlisted to ensure the future for her children. There will never be an iteration of XCOM in which she gets to see her kids again. This true obliteration of the character adds another layer of tragedy over that of Fire Emblem’s.
This element of generation though has been partly removed in XCOM 2, which is why it is to the right of XCOM: Enemy Unknown. The character pool is a tool that allows players to save their generated characters in a place that will live beyond the playthrough. Furthermore, it allows characters in the character pool to show up in future playthroughs, rather than using strictly randomly generated characters every new playthrough. Like Fire Emblem, it provides an assurance of the characters survival in another instance, through the player will have to experience that instance, as documentation of their character does not exist given its generated nature.
XCOM: Enemy Unknown lacks the character pool feature, which dooms each generated character to exist only within their instance. However, what sets it to the right of Darkest Dungeon is its implementation of Ironman mechanic. In XCOM: Enemy Unknown and XCOM 2, Ironman is an optional mechanic that is disabled by default. On top of this, there is a warning text for any player who tries to enable it in XCOM 2.
 
Figure 6: A warning given before activating Ironman in XCOM 2
The game disincentives the mode, making it seem like an option for veterans of the franchise. Darkest Dungeon, by contrast, makes Ironman mandatory. By doing this, it removes any possible method of reversing a consequence. While it can alienate certain players, it creates an experience where players are not tempted to reverse fate. It forces players to deal with the unjust deaths, a narrative experience that is impossible to recreate in games that allow some sort of state reversal. It creates the most permanent deaths possible.
How Darkest Dungeon Creates Meaningful Choices
Darkest Dungeon not only creates, but forces players to make meaningful choices through its implementation of instance specific characters and non-optional Ironman. Out of the games previously mentioned, it fulfills the Morrison’s fourth requirement of permanence the best, making it perfect for the being the subject of further analysis in this paper. From here, Darkest Dungeon can build on the remaining three to create meaningful choices for the player.
Awareness of a character’s mortality is often an implied consequence of Ironman. Not allowing a save load makes characters truly mortal, there are no ways in which a benevolent force can reverse their fortune. While this is an overly poetic way to state it, it is appropriate, as games often use Ironman mechanics to set a gritty or dark tone.
 
Figure 7: Darkest Dungeon's Ironman mechanic is the first thing that appears on a player's screen when the game launches. It is even displayed before the title screen.
With this introduction, the game uses its Ironman mechanic to intimidate the player and set the atmosphere of the game. In the player’s base, the Hamlet, the player is introduced to the Graveyard almost immediately after the tutorial ends. It serves as a constant reminder to the unsatisfactory actions the player took, and its juxtaposition with the current living roster shows the players correct decisions. It is put in the center of the hamlet, making it one of the most prominent elements of the Hamlet’s profile. Similarly, in XCOM, the memorial servers a similar purpose of reminding the player of their losses and mistakes. Both fulfils Morrison’s third requirement for meaningful choices by creating constant reminders. 
 
Figure 8: Darkest Dungeon's graveyard creates a memento of every unjust death.
The game uses awareness to begin the underlying narrative of the game, the narrative of the generated characters. This is the true interactive narrative of the game. Referring to Crawford’s narrative separation of power, this is a user heavy narrative, to the point that this narrative might not exist if the player is not paying attention. The characters could be relegated to numbers on a screen, or the player could create further characterization using their imagination. They could die in their first expedition, or they could be part of the party the slays the final boss. The performances of each character in combat, exploration, and rest forms an emergent storyline. The overlaying narrative, where the player discovers the results of the evil deeds of their Ancestor, is much less compelling. It involves the player restoring the Hamlet that was destroyed by a now dead relative, the Ancestor. It includes uncovering what the Ancestor did in order to bring the Hamlet to ruin. This narrative is much less interactive, and only exists to be a simple string and pearl plot line.
Darkest Dungeon, as well as the other permadeath games, fulfills the “gameplay consequence” requirement from Morrison’s article rather easily. From a logistical standpoint, losing a unit implies a loss of a resources. In Darkest Dungeon, players must invest in their characters using the game’s two currencies, gold and treasures. Upon death, their investments are not recoverable. A death represents lost resources.  
Figure 9: Darkest Dungeon's blacksmith allows the player to exchange gold for better weapons and armor for their character. In order to unlock these however, the player must spend treasures in order to upgrade the blacksmith itself. Each upgrade is unique for each character and is lost on death.
The forced Ironman mechanic is a key feature in the creation of meaningful choices in Darkest Dungeon. The removal of the temptation to reload cuts the safety net the player relies on to optimize their play, forcing them to deal with the emotional consequences. Its facets of interactivity, with its combat, base management, and exploration aspects allow for emergent storytelling, despite not being in a game centered around emergent gameplay.  
Figure 10: A typical battle in Darkest Dungeon. The combat is turn based, with priority generally given to those with higher speed. It features a good dose of random elements, which frequently characterizes units as particularly capable or inept.
As evidenced by Darkest Dungeon, permadeath has the capacity to create tense situations and meaningful choices by combining it with other simple mechanics. There are some issues, however. The algorithmic generation, necessary to create a new cast unique to each instance, sacrifices a lot in terms of characterization in order to automate the process. There is an obvious disparity between the personalities in games with pre-generated such as Fire Emblem and those created in XCOM and Darkest Dungeon. Perhaps there is room to improve however, such as generating basic relationships between characters. There seems the be a sweet spot between random generation and characterization that exists between Darkest Dungeon and Fire Emblem. However, for the purpose of narrative drama, Darkest Dungeon creates the most meaningful decisions by best filling the permanence aspect of Morrison’s meaningful choices.
 
Sources
Bycer, J. (2015, January 26). Player Agency: How Game Design Affects Narrative. Retrieved October 30, 2019, from, https://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/JoshBycer/20150126/234961/Player_Agency_How_Game_Design_Affects_Narrative.php
Crawford, C. (2003). The Art of interactive design: a euphonious and illuminating guide to building successful software. San Francisco: No Starch Press.
Morrison, B. (2013, November 19). Meaningful Choice in Games: Practical Guide & Case Studies. Retrieved October 30, 2019, from https://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/BriceMorrison/20131119/204733/Meaningful_Choice_in_Games_Practical_Guide__Case_Studies.php.
