FMS 394 – Final Project (Fall 2019)


Game Title: Bear River Academy


 
1. Game Description/Summary
In Bear River Academy, players take the role of Bear River Academy’s headmaster. The game is a management strategy game with real time tactics combat, with the player working to create a functional academy in a fictional post-war world. The game gives the player randomly generated staff and students of various species, nationalities, and origins, all of which can impact both the management and combat aspects of the game. These factions can create issues and solutions for the player and must be managed properly in order to create a proper roster and to prevent political tensions. Interpersonal relationships between different students and staff members can be fostered in order to mitigate initial biases, and these fostered relationships will have multiple impacts in gameplay. When students from the Bear River Academy graduate, they will go off to impact the game’s world, and players will feel the repercussions of their decision and teaching methods.
A large part of the game will focus on the inner lives of each generated character. Each character will have randomly generated character archetypes, hobbies, academic interests, motivations, and relationships with other characters. These traits are dynamic and can shift over the course of the game. Dialogue will be made to help simulate the relationships, but given the random nature of the characters, they cannot be extremely personal. However, dialogue between general archetypes can be done in order to have some level of verisimilitude. Another factor to consider for these characters are their instance specific existence. Since these characters are randomly generated for each campaign, their deaths are permanent as each character’s existence does not extend past a single player’s playthrough. The fragility of characters will be a prevalent theme in the game.
Ideally, players will be able to work with the characterization given to create their own stories about each of their characters. Much of a character’s information is meant to serve both a gameplay perspective and a player centric narrative perspective. This is likely a necessity so that the algorithms needed to generate characters can remain relatively uncomplicated.
Not only the characters are randomly generated. Nation relation, species relations, wealth relations, weather, infrastructure status, the strength of various threats, and multitude of other factors can be randomized in order to get several unique experiences. There are two reasons the game would benefit from randomizing all these factors. The first is to make the player feel as if they are inhabiting their own unique world, not an environment crafted for everyone. It should emphasize the fact that they are within their own instance of the game, and that the characters they work with will succeed and fail solely based on the player’s actions. The second reason is to dramatically increase replay value, as each generated world is likely to be significantly different from one another.
The overall thematic selling point of the game comes from the tension of risky and unpredictable situations. Its appeal comes from the emergent gameplay and narrative that arises from a variety of situations that can be generated by both the random and set elements of the game. The game is made for entertainment, but the tone of the game should resemble a drama more than anything else.
 
2. Target Audience/Platform
The game is best on PC, due to the various participatory options that PC offers players, particularly modding. A secondary reason is that strategy-heavy games are typically more popular on the PC market. 
Since the game generates a large chunk of its content through generation, and each added variable increases the number of possible situations and experiences. For example, if there were five original species, each with their own randomly generated relations, that results in 10 combinations. If each relation has 10 different numerical values representing how friendly these species are with each other, then there are 10^10 (ten billion) generations possible. If you add in one extra species, that brings the amount of possible generations up to 10^15 (one quadrillion). This does not even account for how species in one nation might have different views than species in another nation. An elf in one nation might have a different opinion on humans than an elf from another nation. Combine this with the number of different scenarios that can be generated from randomizing other elements of the game (which in turn can also be added to through modding), and the game can have an effectively infinite number of possible instances, with a low chance that one player’s instance will be identical to another’s.
As for the target audience, most strategy and tactics games tend to appeal more to older age groups, though there are plenty of teen and young adult strategy enthusiasts as well. As such, the game should try to cater its content to ages 14 and above. The game should be rather difficult, and younger children might not be able to full grasp the entire breadth of mechanics. On top of this, the grim and post-war setting may not be the most appropriate for younger children.
 

3. Game Story and Characters
 
Figure 1: A map of the Terrebrook Archipelago, the surrounding landmasses include The Silvery Snowlands to the north, Croggeaxus to the east, Lyserine to the south, and Novacrest to the west
Bear River Academy takes place in the fictional Terrebrook Archipelago and its surrounding regions. There are five nations present in the game, one occupying each of the landmasses surrounding the archipelago and one occupying the islands of the archipelago itself. The nations are recovering from a war that was particularly destructive due to the proximity of each of the capitals, and the citizens of every nation are hungry for peace. The war, which was initially fought over the rich natural resources of the archipelago, had escalated into the different nations trying to outright conquer the others. It has lasted for just over a decade, and its effects are near apocalyptic, with much of the remaining infrastructure falling into disarray.
 As a result of this conflict, the five nations have agreed to sign a mutual partial demilitarization, merging each of the nation’s militaries and giving command of the combined forces over to a neutral elected council called the Peacekeepers. All military personnel are now recruited from sources established by the Peacekeeper’s military council, which has established different recruitment and training centers throughout the five kingdoms, each training different branches of the military. The Bear River Academy belongs to the Special Operations branch, and specializes in training different sorts of Auxiliary Fireteams, groups of five distinguished soldiers that are sent out to handle tasks that cannot be adequately dealt with by the other branches of the military. Missions given to Auxiliary Fireteams include policing unstable areas, monster hunts, criminal apprehension, dungeon crawling, bodyguarding, and other operations where a large show of force may be unwanted or unnecessary. On top of these, Auxiliary Fireteams are often sent to assist in larger efforts. Such efforts include larger military conflicts, titan slaying, bandit hunting, relief efforts, and assisting in dealing with incursions from non-traditional hostile forces, such as monsters or the undead.
The Bear River Academy is one of four academies that train Auxiliary Fireteams. The New Sono Academy, the Aethel Academy, and the Guardian Cliff Academy are the other three, located in the cities they are named after. They maintain a friendly rivalry between themselves and the Bear River Academy, and act as benchmarks and competition that can measure the player’s progress.
The setting of the game takes heavy inspiration from early 20th century retro-futuristic punk derivatives, such as Dieselpunk, Steampunk, and Clockpunk (e.g. Bioshock, Legend of Korra, Skullgirls, Dishonored).
 
Figure 2: An example of the Dieselpunk setting
 
Figure 3: Example of a Steampunk setting
 
Figure 4:Example of a Clockpunk setting
 It also draws from urban fantasy and Elfpunk, where typically high fantasy elements, such as magic and fantasy races are put into more modern urban settings (e.g. Shadowrun, Urban Arcana, Harry Potter). 
 
Figure 5: Concept art from Shadowrun, which combines fantasy and cyberpunk elements
 In terms of real-world counterparts, the setting would be most akin to post-World Wars Europe. It is an urban wasteland, where infrastructure is devastated, and survival is not guaranteed. Unlike Europe however, there is no United States equivalent to help restoration efforts, and the area still has many of the same threats it had before the war, such as monsters and bandits. As such, there is a grim tone set for the game, where players will often feel overwhelmed and unsettled by the number of overt and hidden threats.
Characters in the game are artifacts of their world. Each of the five nations have different randomly generated demographic relationships between species, nationality, origin, and several other factors. This means that different combinations of these can alter the meanings of all these factors. An elf raised poor in one nation will have different values than an elf raised wealthy in another. Since the Bear River Academy gets its recruits from all parts of the five nations (and sometimes beyond that), different sorts of social conflicts will emerge between the different recruits, which can lead into demographic conflicts if handled improperly by the player.
An example of a randomly generated character might look like the following: 
Figure 6: An example of a random character
As seen in the image, there are the typical RPG stats. On top of this however, there would be additional information on the character that the player would benefit from knowing. For example, if there were to be a mission that took place in New Sono, then sending this character to assist on that mission might grant some gameplay benefit.
From this information, the game can also identify aspects of demographic tension that this character might have:
 
Figure 7: Example of tensions a character might have
Each of these factors can increase and decrease cohesion with his fellow team members. If the overall cohesion is low enough, there might be gameplay consequences.
As characters progress through their education, they will increase their stats, and thus can upgrade their skills. Upon entrance to the Bear River Academy, new characters are assigned to a base class. Using our example of Sidgem Rumblebrand, he might be recruited as a basic archer, with little combat expertise. As experience is gained, the character will be given opportunities to upgrade his or her class, improving stats and giving the character a few new abilities. Using Sidgem Rumblebrand again, if he were to continue using the bow, he might be able to become a bow sniper as his marksmanship increased. Since stats and some abilities might not be tied to a class, the player should choose classes based on that specific character’s strengths and weaknesses. Class advancement should not be linear either, and classes available to a character should be dependent on their species, nationality, origin, hobbies, and other factors. For example, a human thief who has grown up in a capital city may not have the life experience needed to become a nature-based mage, even if they might have the magical ability to do so. However, their life experience may enable them to put their magical talents to use to become a magic wielding cat burglar.
 
Figure 8: A good example of non-linear class advancement can be seen in the troop progression of Mount and Blade's Floris modpack.
As for the narrative structure of the game, the generation of events and missions does not lend itself well to a structured story. However, it can fit well with the string and pearl methods, albeit with short strings and large pearls. Other games of similar genres, such as XCOM and Darkest Dungeon, seem to have good narrative structures, with multiple generated missions filling in the gaps between missions that advance the plot.
In both Darkest Dungeon and XCOM, story missions are paced by some variable rather than by having some event occur. For example, in Darkest Dungeon, when a player completes a mission, it advances the “level” of the dungeon. Upon level up, the average difficulty of missions generated for that dungeon become harder, and every two levels a new story mission becomes available separate from random generation.
 
Figure 9: This player has done enough missions in the ruins to unlock a story mission, designated by the skill icon. Unlike other missions, the quest will always appear once a certain condition is met.
By following this method, the game call allow room for both structured storylines and random events to coexist. 
The plot of the game is not the focus. Rather, it is the characters and worldbuilding that take precedent. Players should be encouraged to learn more about their roster and the world they inhabit in order to make optimal decisions. Ignoring the effects of the war, the cultures of the nations, and the relations that can arise between students can lead to dire gameplay consequences.
 

4. Gameplay and Interaction
The gameplay is split into three interdependent sections, the academy management phase, the mission management phase, and the action phase. All three will provide opportunities to contribute towards the goal of the game – to rebuild the Terrebrook Archipelago’s infrastructure and nations.
The academy phase represents the management of Bear River Academy’s students and staff. In this phase, the player will be able to make decisions concerning their roster and the training of said roster. Examples of activities the player can do here include: reviewing student applications and determining who to accept into the academy, hiring and manage the academy’s staff such as teachers, security guards, recruiters, and other people that might benefit the academy and its students, creating the coursework for individual students in order to improve their capabilities, ordering new facilities to be constructed in order to benefit the academy, forming Auxiliary Fireteams out of newly recruited students, and making decisions surrounding the politics of running a school. A good comparison from other games would be the “Explore” and “Instruct” activities in Fire Emblem: Three Houses. In these, players can interact with students and staff to learn more about their lives and to influence their academics in order to advance their unit’s skills.
 
Figure 10: An example of what players can do while performing the "Explore" Activity. They can interact with their units and perform tasks that will bring them gameplay benefits. Bear River Academy hopes to do something similar, albeit in a more spreadsheet heavy manner (entirely 2d menus rather than 3d space, more mechanics that allow players to influence the academy and its students)
 
Figure 11: An example of what players can do while performing the "Instruct" acticity. Here they can influnce what skills their units develop.
The mission management phase is where players determine how to influence the world outside the academy by deploying their students to assist each nation’s recovery. This is also where students go to get practical experience. In this phase, players will be able to make decisions concerning what mission to complete, what missions to ignore, and which Auxiliary Fireteam goes to which mission. On top of this, they can participate in Peacekeeper councils to influence various political decisions. A good comparison of this phase would be to the Geoscape from XCOM 2, particularly the modified one from the mod Long War 2. In it, players can send squads to complete certain missions, build new infrastructure that gives the player gameplay benefits, keep track of the current state of the war, and perform various other grand strategy-like decisions.
In the mission management phase, players will be able to track the recovery of each nation through a progress bar. Once this bar is full for all nations, the player wins the game. 
 
Figure 12: The Geoscape from XCOM 2, modified with additional decisions given by Long War 2
The action phase is where players will be able to perform the missions themselves using whatever Auxiliary Fireteam they sent. For most missions, the action phase is a combat phase, where the students must fight against some foe. The combat will be shown through a top down perspective, and players will be able to control the team they sent through RTS-link controls. Games with similar combat systems include Baldur’s Gate, Icewind Dale, and Domina (in perspective, not control).
 
Figure 13: An image taken from a combat sequence in Icewind Dale
 
Figure 14: A combat sequence in Domina. While the player only controls one character in Domina, Bear River Academy will allow players to control multiple. This scene does represent what combat might look like visually, however.
For non-combat missions, the action phase will involve a sequence of text-based decision trees that allow the player to influence how the event will unfold. Players can make decisions that will either punish or reward them based on their knowledge of their characters, the game, the game’s world. A good comparison from other games would be how players interact with events in Stellaris.
 
Figure 15: In Stellaris, the way players can interact with certain events are based on the ethics of their governance, as well as their knowledge of other governments and non-government elements (in this case, it is knowing the language of the Void).
Players will go through each phase multiple times throughout their playthrough, and decisions made in one phase should impact how other phases play. For example, if the player were to make a student proficient in a certain language in the academy management phase and sent that student to a mission taking place in a region where that language is spoken in the mission management phase, then a new dialogue option that reflects the student’s skill in that language may appear in the action phase. In order to be successful, the player must master the mechanics of all three different phases. 
Character death is an important part of Bear River Academy, and mechanics should be introduced into the game that reflect the social impact of a character’s death. For example, seeing a team member die will impact the emotional state of rest of the team. If the member who dies was a hunting buddy of another team member, the surviving team member might stop hunting due to trauma. As a result, gameplay bonuses that character received from their hunting experience might be reduced or even removed entirely. On top of this, a replacement member must be found, and there might not be a perfect fit to fill gap left. There might be demographic tension, or the new member might not have the skills needed for the player to perform their combat strategy. In these ways, a character’s death should create a ripple effect that disrupts the status quo of the player’s gameplay.
As mentioned earlier, the goal of the player is to bring law and infrastructure back to the lands of the Terrebrook Archipelago. In order to do so however, two requirements should be met. First, the progress bars that represents the rebuilding of the Archipelago and its surrounding lands should be filled. This can be fulfilled by successfully completing missions and influencing other Peacekeeper council members to make the positive changes. Second, all foreign invaders, such as aggressive neighbors and raiding barbarians, and supernatural threats, such as monsters and the undead, should be dealt with to the point where they do not pose a significant threat the to five nations. This can happen by completing missions that oppose such factions. Both tasks can be assisted by putting students who graduate the academy into influential positions. For example, a student who has plenty of experience fighting the undead can be sent off to lead a war effort against the undead after graduation, which lowers the threat of the undead factions in exchange for losing access to the student.
 

5. Game Design
First and foremost, Bear River Academy is a management game. The action phase is where players can see the effects of their management, which is important, but most of the game involves resource management and planning. As such, the game will be more like other management games rather than RTS games.
Previously mentioned roster-based management games are good overall comparisons to Bear River Academy in terms of gameplay. XCOM and Darkest Dungeon are the closest comparisons, as they also offer a sort of combat/management dichotomy in their gameplay. 
Figure 16: XCOM 2 is split into a strategy phase and a tactics phase, like Bear River Academy

 
Figure 17: Darkest Dungeon has a similar split between strategy and tactics
A narrative similarity between these three games is the focus on the generated characters of the game, and the emergent stories that come from the situations the characters are put in. In terms of emotions players feel, the permadeath of characters and the focus on long term strategy mixed with short term tactics should make its emotional impact like that of XCOM and Darkest Dungeon as well. Player should ideally be using their imagination to add to the emergent stories and the generated aspects of their roster. This gives a large amount of narrative power to the player, but it makes their instance of the game feel more personal as well. However, there is one distinction between XCOM and Darkest Dungeon that makes Bear River Academy more like the latter in terms of tone. In Darkest Dungeon, there is a focus on more fantasy elements and grim narrative. In Darkest Dungeon, many of the narrative elements, such as the narrator and the dialogue of the characters, point out the overwhelming danger of exploring the dungeons below the estate. Bear River Academy should ideally set a similar tone, with narrative elements of the game showing the risk the students are taking when going on their mission, and having the death of characters include ripple effects that make them something more than a name on a gravestone.
In terms of looks, there are many games that take from similar influence. Bioshock and Dishonored are game similar in visual style, and the game’s environments should ideally look similar to these games. As mentioned earlier, the Bear River Academy takes its visual inspiration from retro-futuristic settings, such as Dieselpunk, Steampunk, and Clockpunk. Bioshock and Dishonored draw from similar settings, and thus make good comparisons. Dishonored makes a particularly good comparison, as it takes further inspiration from post-World War Europe and the Industrial Revolution, inspirations for the visuals of Bear River Academy. The environments of the game should look grim in order to reflect the tone of the game.
 
Figure 18: Concept art showing the architecture of Bioshock
 
Figure 19: Gameplay footage showing the visual style of Dishonored

