You continue to talk to her, but she keeps getting annoyed with you. Eventually she tells you that she wants to leave since there isn't anything else interesting going on in the city.

> go and cry

You decide to go back home where you would cry for a few hours. When you get back, you see that everyone has gone home. You don't really feel like crying though, so you just stay in bed all day.

> start a business

You decide to keep sleeping all day as well. The next morning, you finally get up and decide to start a business. You figure if you can't do something useful with your life, at least you'll be able to sleep through the night.

> sell water guns to make money

You walk out of your house and into the street. You take a deep breath and point to some buildings ahead of you. You wave your hand and they disappear in front of you. You wait for them to reappear before continuing walking.

> "im in the matrix"

You continue walking and suddenly you hear a voice in your head. It sounds very familiar...

> listen to the voice

It's a female voice. It sounds very old and tired sounding. You turn around and see an older woman wearing glasses sitting in the middle of the road holding a water gun. She stares at you with a blank expression on her face, but she does not seem angry or hostile.

> talk to her

She smiles when she sees you and speaks in a soothing tone.

> listen

"I'm sorry about earlier, I was worried."

> "sorry for what"

"The world is a scary place right now. We need to stop fighting each other and work together."

> "what"

"We're all connected, we've been here before, we will be again..."

> "yea but my question"

"What?"

> "sorry for what"

"Sorry for being so pessimistic, I know it's hard right now."

> "A man is sick in lego city"

"Yes, yes, I get it. But if we don't start working together then we'll never make any progress."

> "take him to the hospital in the new ambulance"

"Okay, okay, I understand. Take me to the hospital in the new ambulance."

> "HEY"

"Hey, no need to shout at me!" She says with a smile.

> "Build new ambulance"

"No, that won't do. The old one broke down on me when I tried to leave town. It wouldn't take you anywhere."

> "Wuhan virus detection test"

"It's not that bad, just go back to your house and wait until it passes."

> "yes, he is infected with the virus"

"Well I'm sorry about this, but there isn't much else we can do except try to find a cure or something."

> "new emergency collection from lego city"

"I guess we should look around again, maybe there will be some useful things here."