Intro
For years now, Phantom Forces has been a top game on the Roblox platform recieving nearly 
600 million visits and 3 million favorites. It is a Roblox giant and it's easy to see why.
Compared to your average Roblox game, Phantom Forces offers a fully playable First Person
Shooter with a large array of fully customizable weapons, a wide variety of maps, and a 
handful of different game modes to play. But unfortunately, the game has many problems.
Things like terrible map design, clunky gunplay, broken movement, unbalanced weapons, 
etc. make Phantom Forces far less enjoyable than it could be. Before we get into those,
however, I just want to preface this by saying that I've been playing Phantom Forces since
the very beginning and I played Call of Robloxia 5 before that. I've seen the many iterations
and changes to the game and the evolution from what it used to be. The game has taken massive 
strides from its origins, but remains a flawed game.

MAPS
By far the most glaring problem in Phantom Forces are the maps. As of right now, there are
a total of 12 Maps in the game. Crane Site, Desert Storm, Metro, Warehouse, Dunes, Suburbia,
Ravod 911, Mall, Highway Lot, Ruins, Mirage, and Rig. Of these maps I would consider 2 "good"
maps, 5 "meh", and 5 "bad". 
 THE GOOD:
 The maps I would consider good require a few things. They should not only be aesthetically
pleasing, but should also have a good flow from both sides of the map, allow for both long
and short range play, have multiple routes for players to use, and avoid wasting space. The
only two maps I would put in this category are Desert Storm and debatably Crane Site. Desert
Storm is the best map in the game by far allowing for the effective use of every weapon
type in the game. Whether you want to use shotguns, snipers, smgs, dmrs, assault rifles, or
really anything else, you should be able to make good use of it on this map. Crane Site is
also a good map, but not nearly as good. It has too much focus on verticality, leading most
matches to boil down to fighting over rooftops.
 THE MEH:
 The maps that belong in this category are a mixed bag. For a map to be considered "meh", it
would mean that the map has some good things about it, but is ultimately blocked from being a 
good map by one or more problems. The maps I would put in this category are Metro, Warehouse,
Ravod 911, Mall, and Highway Lot. Starting off with the best of the Meh, we have Metro. Metro
is a map that I would nearly consider good. The main issue with it being the stupidly long
central lane of the map and the massive clusterF*** in the center. Mall is also quite close to
being a good map, but suffers from a large amount of empty space. The outdoor areas are useless
and a lot of lower areas in the map tend to be ignored in favor of a rooftop battle seeing as
the rooftop gives line of sight to every single floor as well as the ground outside. Ravod 911
is a classic map from the PF lineup that has changed quite a lot over time and become a decent
map. Unfortunately, the spawns on this map usually lead to one team sitting on the rooftop 
watching the other team spawning in. The map also has primarily very long lines of sight 
favoring sniper rifles and dmrs while punishing shotgun users as well as smgs. Warehouse is a
map that was so close to being good, but in the end suffered from a severe lack of flow. The
center of this map is a deathtrap making you visible every side and from multiple two story 
buildings. Because of this, most players just push along either side of the map turning it into
a slow, spawn pushy, building campy game. Highway Lot is a map that has a history of being 
extremely broken, but over time has improved to being playable. It still has one of the most
broken spawntraps in the game and is one of the WORST maps on King of the Hill, but it is 
playable at the very least.
 THE BAD:
 Maps that make it into this category are the worst that Phantom Forces has to offer. They 
may have a few good things about them, but for the most part, these maps are flawed and 
frustrating to play. The maps that make it into this category are Dunes, Suburbia, Ruins, Rig,
and of course Mirage. Suburbia is the best of this bunch in my opinion, but suffers from long 
lines of sight and bad spawntrapping. The original map had blockers on the roof to help the 
flow, but for some reason after players were repeatedly glitching onto the roof, instead of
fixing it, the devs just decided to make it a feature and completely broke any flow the map had.
Dunes is another map that is close to being ok, but has far too many wide open areas, long, 
empty lines of sight, a deathtrap center area, and really abusable spawntraps. Ruins would 
almost be a good map if it weren't for the ridiculous verticality of the map. The center is 
completely wide open with views from every side as well as plenty of perches far above for 
snipers. The underground is barren and hardly gets any use and even if it did, it's just a 
bunch of empty, bland hallways. Rig is a strange mess of a map. Every part of Rig has so many
angles to be killed from. The verticality ultimately leads to rooftop camping and the lower
rooms on the map are largely empty wastes of space. The map has virtually no flow and everyone
is just running in random directions until they bump into someone. Decent Idea for a map, but 
really badly executed. Last, and definitely least, Mirage. I did a recent community poll asking 
people's opinions on the current maps in PF. Mirage by FAR polled the worst getting nearly 50%
Very Bad rating. This map is widely disliked by the community and for good reason. It is the 
largest map in the game featuring multiple tall construction sites, 2 cranes, and the longest
lines of sight you'll normally get on any map. This, compacted with the lack of cover or 
available flanking routes leaves only two options: Snipe, or be sniped. It's a truly awful map
that supports one playstyle, is visually unappealing, and is the only map in the game that 
immediately makes me want to hop servers.
 FINAL NOTE ON MAPS:
 One thing that makes maps in Phantom Forces really inconsistent is the way that game modes
change them. Some maps can be a ton of fun on Flare Domination, but completely abysmall on 
KOTH. I would say that most of my judgement in general for the maps comes from Flare, TDM, 
and Kill Confirmed. KOTH automatically makes most maps worse in every way, so I try not to
think about that.

GUNPLAY
