Study Guide Questions for Exam #3
Financial Environment Analysis (Week 6)
Blackboard lectures
Financial Environment Analysis I
1. Country/Firm-specific examples of how various aspects of the financial environment affect business strategies
2. Various types of exposures that firms have to exchange rate fluctuations
3. Key drivers of changes in the financial environment
4. Role of central banks in the economy
Financial Environment Analysis II
1. How do fractional reserve banking systems work?
2. What is the reserve requirement that central banks impose on the other banks in the system? Why is this imposed?
3. What is the reserve ratio? How does it impact the banking system?
Financial Environment Analysis III
1. Fiscal versus monetary policy
2. How do central banks typically conduct monetary policy in “normal” time?
3. What are the requirements imposed on major banks by the central bank?
4. What is the Federal Funds rate?
Financial Environment Analysis IV
1. Exercise on foreign exchange markets and transactions (see the lecture on Blackboard for questions and problems)
Financial Environment Analysis V
1. What is a Balance of Payments statement?
2. Components of the Current Account
3. Components of the Capital Account
Financial Environment Analysis VI
1. What is the relationship between a country’s current account balance and its capital account balance? Why does this happen?
Financial Environment Analysis VII
1. What are some of the exchange rate arrangements used by countries to manage exchange rates?
2. What is the strategy of the Monetary Authority of Singapore? Why does it use this strategy?

HBSP Coursepack
1. “Foreign Exchange Markets and Transactions” (HBSP Coursepack)
a. You are responsible for all the material (including calculations) in the first 14 pages (see the Exercise specified in the Blackboard lecture).
Supplemental readings (emailed via Canvas on 11.16.2019)
2. “The Classroom Economist: Fractional Reserve Banking”
a. What key societal need or problem is solved by the existence of a well-developed banking system?
b. What is direct finance?
c. What allows banks and other financial intermediaries to exist side by side with direct finance?
d. What is the problem of “asymmetric information”?
e. What are “reserves,” “inside money,” and “outside money”?
f. How does fractional reserve banking generate “money”?
g. How does the Federal Reserve control/regulate money supply?
3. “Monopoly Power over Money”
a. This article was discussed in the Blackboard lectures. Please review this after you have reviewed the lectures.
4. “Facts Behind the Figures: A Quick Guide to the Balance of Payments”
a. This article was discussed in the Blackboard lectures. Please review this after you have reviewed the lectures.
5.  “When Currencies Collapse: Two Tales from Thailand”
a. How do currency devaluations affect firms?
b. What factors explain the contrasting fortunes of Delta Electronics and Thai Petrochemical Industries?
6. “Currency Pegs: Poor Dollar Standard”
a. What are the pros and cons of pegging a currency to a reserve currency such as the U.S. dollar or the euro?
b. What is the special problem that Hong Kong faces?
7. “U.S. Retailers Target-ing Avid Canadian Shoppers”
a. Why are Canadian shoppers near the U.S. border shopping in stores in the U.S.?
b. According to the Canadian media why do Canadians generally pay more for retail items, compared to what Americans pay in the U.S.?
8. “Aeon Says Yen’s Climb Provides Growth Opportunity That’s too Great to Miss”
a. What changes in Japan’s financial environment explain Aeon’s change in its foreign expansion strategy?
9. “Hong Kong’s Savers Losing Purchasing Power”
a. How does the Hong Kong Monetary Authority manage exchange rates?
b. What are the pros and cons of having a currency board?
c. How does this impact Hong Kong’s economy?
d. How is it affecting savers and retailers in Hong Kong?
10. “QE, or not QE?” (need to read only sections highlighted in yellow)
a. What are some of the tools used by central banks to implement unconventional monetary policy?
b. What is QE?
c. What is the objective underlying QE?
d. How are the open market operations conducted as part of QE different from those conducted in “normal” times?
e. What is “Operation Twist”?
f. How does QE affect the real economy?
g. What are the potential negative consequences of QE?
11. “China’s economy: In three parts”
a. What is the likely economic impact of China’s (“peak toil”) demographic turning point?
b. What are the three forms of growth that are focused on in the article?
c. What is the main “excess” (imbalance) in China’s economic/financial environment?
d. What are the three ways in which credit growth can affect the economic/financial environment? What are their differential impacts? 

Legal and Political Environment Analysis (Week 7)
Blackboard Lectures
Legal and Political Environment Analysis I
1. Definition of political risk
2. How is political risk different from economic risk?
3. What are some of the major sources of political risk?
4. Examples of how political risk affects firms
Legal and Political Environment Analysis II
1. What are the four major dimensions of political risk in the framework developed by the Eurasia group for political risk analysis?
2. What are some of the indicators used to assess each of these dimensions?
Legal and Political Environment Analysis III
1. Application of Eurasia Group’s framework to analyze political risk in China
2. How does China perform with respect to each of the four major dimensions of political risk?
Legal and Political Environment Analysis IV
1. What are the opportunities and challenges for multinational firms in African country markets?
Legal and Political Environment Analysis V
1. What are the criteria used to classify countries for the econo-political macro-segmentation of African country markets?
2. What are the salient characteristics of each segment?

Legal and Political Environment Analysis VI
1. What are some of the major strategic considerations for multinational firms wanting to enter African country markets?
2. What are the strategies that multinationals could use to mitigate political risk?
HBSP Coursepack
1. “Managing Risk in an Unstable World” (HBSP Coursepack)
a. Discussed in the Blackboard lectures.

2. “Cracking the Next Growth Market: Africa” (HBSP Coursepack)
a. Discussed in the Blackboard lectures.
Supplemental Readings (emailed via Canvas on 11.18.2019)
1. “Vodafone Considers $2.2 Billion India Provision After Law Change”
a. Why was Vodafone considering a $2.2 billion provision in India?
2. “Energy in Argentina: Sparks in the Dark”
a. What factors in the economic and political environment led to the nationalization of Repsol’s Argentine business?
3. “Adidas Withdraws ‘Sexual’ T-Shirts Following Brazil’s Complaint”
a. Why did the Brazilian government complain about the T-shirts sold by Adidas?
4. “Chinese Multinationals: Who’s Afraid of Huawei?”
a. How does the political environment affect Huawei’s ability to do business in different parts of the world?
b. How are the political concerns raised by Huawei’s Chinese origins handled in Britain?
5. “Huawei Technologies to ‘Voluntarily’ Restrict Business Dealings in Iran”
a. Why did Huawei Technologies decide to restrict its business activities in Iran?
6. “China’s murky ownership rules: Who Owns What?”
a. What is the purpose of the investment vehicle VIE?
b. What are the potential risks to firms using a VIE?
7. “Why it’s Time to Kill the Sugar Tariff”
a. What were the reasons behind the imposition of tariffs on imports of sugar and ethanol?
b. What were the consequences of imposing these tariffs?
8. “Safety Concerns Threaten the Market for Caffeinated Food and Drink”
a. How do certain rules and regulations differentially affect various marketers of caffeinated drinks? Who are the beneficiaries of these rules?

Cultural Environment Analysis (Final Week)
Blackboard Lectures
Definition of Culture
7 Elements of Culture
Cultures and the Marketing Mix
Global Account Management (GAM); definitions and requirements
The drivers of Buyer behavior and consumer needs
4 stages of the consumption processes
Culture is: Learned, Interrelated, Shared
Components of Cross-Cultural Comparisons
The Self-reference criterion (SRC)

HBSP Coursepack
1. “National Culture and Management” (HBSP Coursepack)
a. Discussed in the Blackboard lectures.  This reading provides additional insights.  In particular, please read the section on Defining Culture (Pages 2 and 3), Edward Hall’s 6 ‘languages’ of culture (time, space, material goods, friendship, agreement; Pages 4 and 5), and the Hofstede section, which complement those in your text (individualism/collectivism; power distance, uncertainty avoidance, masculinity/femininity; Pages 7 and 8).  

2. “Being the Boss in Brussels, Boston, and Beijing” (HBSP Coursepack)
a. Being the Boss in Brussels, Boston, and Beijing, Erin Meyer
b. The two dimensions of leadership culture
c. Small ‘d’ and capital ‘D’ decision making
d. The anchors for mapping leadership cultures; what are the four leadership cultures

Transfer Pricing (Final Week)
Blackboard Lectures
Transfer Pricing I
1. In a purely domestic context, what is transfer pricing?
2. Why do large firms use transfer pricing in a purely domestic context?
3. Cost versus profit centers
4. Management accounting versus financial accounting
Transfer Pricing II
1. What incentives do corporate tax rate differentials among countries create for multinationals when making cross-border transfer pricing decisions?
2. How are overall after-tax profits of multinational firms affected by changes in cross-border transfer pricing decisions?
3. With respect to certain key stakeholders, what are some of the (conflicting) issues that arise in cross-border transfer pricing decisions?
Transfer Pricing III
1. What is the Basic Arm’s Length Standard in cross-border transfer pricing? What is its underlying objective?
2. What are some of the methods used by multinational firms to implement the Basic Arm’s Length Standard?


Transfer Pricing IV
1. Illustrative examples of transfer pricing problems and profit shifting methods


Supplemental Readings (emailed via Canvas on 11.19.2019)
1. “Corporate Profit-Shifting Has Become Big Business”
a. What is the difference between tax avoidance and tax evasion?
b. What incentives do cross-country variations in corporate tax rates create for multinationals?
c. How do tech companies try to minimize their tax payments?
d. What is a major problem in implementing the arm’s-length principle?
e. What is unitary taxation?

6


