REDACTED’s Venture

A young adventurer named REDACTED once found himself awakening in a seemingly uninhabited world. The world was diverse and beautiful, but he recognized that he would need shelter. He did not question his surprise entry into existence, but rather started destroying trees with his fists. After making an impromptu shelter and staying there throughout the night, he decided to explore. After a while, he ran across a village. The village seemed to have done well for itself, which was surprising considering all of its inhabitants were completely void of any sign of intelligence. However, he did have to give them credit for having a farm. Once REDACTED returned to his measly shelter, he decided to explore the lands directly around him. While swimming in a nearby lake, he saw a light down at the floor. Swimming down to it, he discovered an entrance to a structure! “My God.” REDACTED exclaimed, “I’ve stumbled across the most powerful house in the game! The Mithril House of Mob-Smiting!” For you see, long ago, this house was forged in the fiery pits of Tartarus by the grand blacksmith of Lucifer himself, in a time before the world began. This world was called the Nether, and a portal was made to connect both worlds. However, when it reached the other world, people claimed the house as their own. Lucifer could not stand this, and started sending his most powerful beings through the portal. These beings killed everything that moved, and infected the land so that every night more of them would spawn. All the occupants of the house were eventually killed, and Lucifer was nearly victorious. But one person named Mardoza Mithril had vowed to protect the world and that house, and he had a plan. After he had gained strong materials and a lot of experience, he realized that this house, the Mithril House of Mob-Smiting, would be his downfall. So he created explosives, and collected more water than he ever had before, and exploded the land underneath the house. The explosives were too powerful, and they damaged Mardoza as well, but he was determined to complete the task that was bestowed upon him.  The house fell, along with the portal, and Mardoza filled the large hole with water, cutting off the portal from the world forever. The land was doomed, but it shouldn’t get any worse. He went back into his house, and realized he was gravely injured from the explosives he used. He put all his materials in his chests, and began to think upon his impact to this world. And thus, Mardoza, Guardian of the house, fell to his knees, and passed from this world, leaving behind the mighty house, for he knew that, one day, its power would be acquired once more. Yes, for as you can see, the legacy of the house lives on.
